Title: Risk Assessment Optimisation with MONARC
Date: 2018-06-20
Hidden: false
Slug: publications/risk-assessment-optimisation-with-monarc

<br/>** Abstract: ** There are many solutions to cover risk assessment: from big software
solutions to standalone applications – even based on spreadsheets. A
risk assessment takes a significant amount of time and becomes expensive
rather quickly resulting in the impossibility for small companies to
perform such an analysis. MONARC aims to make performing more accessible
through optimisations and sharing. Each of these reduce the time needed
to perform such an assessment and subsequenty, money. Finally, after the
development of the tool, MONARC has been released as open source
software (GNU Affero General Public License version 3).

In this paper, we will introduce MONARC, the optimisation and sharing
features. The presentation will include a live demo of the introduced
features.

** Index Terms ** - risk-analysis, governance, security, cybersecurity, threat,
vulnerabilities, risk-assessment, risk-evaluation, risk-treatment

## Introduction

There are many solutions to cover risk assessment: from big software
solutions to standalone applications – the initial proof of concept for
MONARC was based, like others too, on spreadsheets. However, a certain
number of these solutions are either limited in functionality or tend to
be difficult to use. Additionally, performing a risk assessment takes a
significant amount of time and becomes expensive rather quickly. It does
not help financially that the risk assessment should be done
periodically and that each time recommendations usually result in the
implementation of controls, which add to the cost.

To reduce the cost of a risk analysis, both in terms of money and time,
experts from CASES[^1] have developped the MONARC platform[^2] which
provides pragmatic, inexpensive optimisations. These optimisations are
the result of years of experience in the field. The saved time and
finances allow for more available resources to implement a
recommendations.

The other bigger advantage of the MONARC solution - and that adds on top
of the optimisation - is the sharing of everything; the risk models and
even the source code[^3]. No license fees, no special
commercial/non-commercial use models etc. It is under the GNU Affero
General Public License version 3.

## What is MONARC

Depending on its size and its security needs, organisations must react
in the most appropriate manner. Adopting good practices, taking the
necessary measures and adjusting them proportionally: all this is part
of the process to ensure information security. Most of all, it depends
on performing a risk analysis on a regular basis. Although the
profitability of the risk analysis approach is guaranteed, the
investment represented in terms of the required cost and expertise is a
barrier for many companies, especially small and medium sized
enterprises (SMEs).

MONARC aims to remedy this situation by allowing all organisations, no
matter the size, to benefit from the advantages that a risk analysis
offers. As a method it allows to perform a repeatable and precise risk
management.

The advantage of MONARC lies in the capitalisation of risk analyses
already performed in similar business contexts: the same vulnerabilities
regularly appear in many businesses, as they face the same threats and
generate comparable risks. Most companies have servers, printers, a
fleet of smartphones, Wi-Fi antennas, etc. It is therefor sufficient to
generalise risk scenarios for many assets (also called objects) by
context and/or business.

## Phases of MONARC

The phases of MONARC start with the context establishment (or plan)
phase, followed by the context modelling (or do) phase, the evaluations
(or check) phase and finally the implementation and monitoring (or act)
phase. Thus it is similar to the PDCA[^4] method. The relation between
each phase can be seen in Figure 1.
<div align="center">
  <img src="/assets/images/hack2018-paper/method.png" width="50%">
  <p><br/><strong>Fig. 1</strong> MONARC, a method in four phases</p>
</div>


#### Context Establishment

The first step is to take stock of the context, challenges and
priorities of the company or organization that wishes to analyse its
risks. This particularly serves to identify key activities and critical
processes of the business in order to guide the risk analysis towards
the most important elements. To do this, a kick-off meeting is organized
with the members of the management and key individuals. The goal is to
know what makes the company “live” and what could destroy it, to
identify the key processes, the internal and external threats as well as
organisational, technical and human vulnerabilities.

#### Context Modelling

This phase includes the modelling of objects (secondary assets) and
trees. The primary assets were identified in the previous phase. They
must now be detailed and formalised in a diagram that displays their
interdependence. Impacts are defined at the level of the primary assets
(processes or information), following the information gathered in the
context establishment phase. The secondary assets inherit the impact of
the primary asset to which they are attached (object tree). The impact
level of the secondary assets can be modified manually.

#### Evaluation and treatment of risks

The assessment consists of quantifying the threats, vulnerabilities and
impacts in order to calculate the risks. To do this, it is necessary to
have quality information about the exact likelihood of the threats, the
ease of exploitation of vulnerabilities and potential impacts; hence the
need to rely on metrics that have been validated by experts. When the
risk assessment identifies a risk that is higher than the acceptable
level (risk acceptance grid also known as risk appetite), risk treatment
measures should be implemented in order to reduce the risk to an
acceptable level.

#### Implementation and monitoring

When the first treatment of risks has been carried out, an ongoing
management phase with security monitoring and recurring control of
security measures must be entered, in order to improve it in a
sustainable manner.

This fourth phase also allows to continuously optimise security by
increasing the detail of objects used and by expanding the scope of the
risk analysis.

## Optmisations


MONARC includes 5 levels of optimisations and simplifications:

1.  Assets with attached risks;

2.  Heritage of impacts;

3.  Global assets;

4.  Import and export of assets including (or excluding) the evaluation;

5.  Generation of reports/deliverables.

<div align="center">
  <img src="/assets/images/hack2018-paper/PrimaryAssetRiskExampleVert.png" width="90%">
  <p><br/><strong>Fig. 2</strong> Artificial Asset Example</p>
</div>

But before we can get into the details, we should highlight how the
assets and risks are defined, as they are essential to understand the
optimisations possible.

There are two risk types existing:

1.  Operational risks which are directly connected to primary assets.
    These do not have direct threats nor vulnerability and thus are
    evaluated differently (_impact * probability_);

2.  Informational risks which are based on the relation of
    vulnerability, threat and impact.

This also explains that there are two types of assets:

1.  Primary assets, like core business (departments, information,
    etc...);

2.  Supporting assets, like servers, employees, buildings, etc.

In general, an asset includes a special set of risks. Looking at the
example in Figure 2, we have a printing service which has
a building and a printer. The building has risks attached and so does
the printer. Now that the basic structure of modelling assets is known,
we can touch on the different parts of optimisation.

#### Assets and their risks

The modelling of assets takes some time, especially if the risks have to
be identified for each asset first. Identifying these risks takes time
and a risk can be forgotten easily. Thus coming back, adding the missing
risk and only then continuing the risk assessment reduces productivity.
To limit the time lost, we allow to define assets with risks already
attached. In that way, when the asset is added to the analysis, the
risks attached to that asset are automatically added as well.

#### Heritage of impacts and risks

As previously discussed, each risk has an impact and its context is
given by the asset the risk is attached to. The context of that asset is
the parent asset and so forth. So the optimisation here is, since the
primary asset gives the context to each of the child assets, only the
primary asset needs to be impacted: the child assets will automatically
inherit the impacts (using a top-down approach). It is still possible to
manually evaluate each impact but for most situations, this is really
accelerating the evaluation process.

In contrast to the heritage of impacts, the risks of the supporting
assets are automatically inherited to the primary asset. Because if a
supporting asset fails, the primary asset is impacted or fails as well.
As such, the heritage is not only top-down but also bottom-up.

#### Global assets

Sometimes it is the case to have supporting assets that support multiple
primary assets: a building for example. The optimisation in this case is
to introduce global assets. This means that less risks have to be
evaluated. As an example: the building, as it is the same for many
services, only needs to be evaluated once – the one with the highest
impact.

#### Deliverable generation

Inputting all this information is great, but if it cannot be exported to
report to management, all the work is less productive. Therefore,
deliverables can be generated at specific moments: at the end of each
phase – MONARC has four phases[^5].

#### Import and export

Not only can the tool generate reports to present to management but
there is an import and export feature built in. This allows for one
department to create a risk model that can then be shared amongst
departments. It also allows to be shared publicly of course. This again
optimises and reduces the work time: the model already exists and does
not need to be created first. Thus, the workload can be distributed over
the community and reduces the cost of every individual organisation by
some margin avoiding double work.

## Sharing and community

Sharing is a big part of this software: sharing the code, sharing assets
and risk models and finally, sharing a whole analysis. The latter part
is very interesting to companies with multiple departments (maybe even
international): they can ask their departments to perform a risk
analysis with a certain model. Then they can combine the analysis and
can define rather quickly how the company risks look in general.

Sharing assets or risk models is an interesting concept as it allows for
some organisation to create an asset (or composition thereof) and it
linked risks. Once such an asset has been defined, that organisation can
then export that asset and make it available to any interested party.
The latter can then import it and can immediately start with the
evaluation process instead of first having to build the asset
themselves. The sharing can of course be selective: each asset can be
chosen and exported and then, the exporter can choose with whom to
share.

Finally, we share the code so that everyone can enjoy what has been
created by everyone. The goal is to have a tool for the community
created by the community.

## Ongoing and future works

Future work will enhance:

1. The overall MONARC platform with new functions, such as a statement of applicability (SOA), improvements for
the new dashboard and hopefully your ideas/contributions.

2. The sharing of MONARC objects with a new tool and by trying to educate a
community not so used to the sharing of information.

Our short to mid-term roadmap is also available[^6]. We do not really
have a strict long term roadmap - no false promises.

We are working on a solution[^7] which will let the users share their
MONARC JSON objects much easier. The source code is under GNU Affero
General Public License version 3. It will also help the users to build
valid security objects, thanks to validations against JSON schemas. In
order to gather a maximum of security related objects in this repository
the platform will accept contributions that are not only for MONARC.
Furthermore security objects are editable via a Web form generated from
the schemas. So that every security researcher will be able to
contribute with her/his work.

## Conclusion

In this paper we briefly presented the MONARC method and platform,
highlighting its contribution to the community: optimisations and the
ability to easily share the information. Each of the presented
optimisations and even the sharing part will reduce the amount of
resources needed to perform a risk analysis.

During the presentation a short live demo where each of the
aforementioned optimisations and sharing will be demonstrated on a
dedicated instance of MONARC.

[^1]: [CASES](https://www.cases.lu/)

[^2]: [MONARC: Optimised Risk Assessment Methodology by CASES](https://www.monarc.lu)

[^3]: [Github Project Page](https://github.com/monarc-project)

[^4]: PDCA: plan-do-check-act

[^5]: [MONARC Method Guide](/documentation/method-guide)

[^6]: [MONARC Roadmap](https://github.com/monarc-project/MonarcAppFO/wiki/Roadmap)

[^7]: [MOSP](https://github.com/CASES-LU/MOSP)
